---
id: "277-3"
session_id: "session-277"
presenter: "Safiyah Suleman"
affiliation: "MSc @ Oxford University"
title: "Norm-Technical Agency (NTA): Negotiating Agency through Interoperability in the Geopolitics of AI Infrastructure"
---

The procurement of AI infrastructure, including data centres, cloud platforms, and high-
performance chips, has become central to national digital development agendas. Smaller states
that lack the domestic capacity to produce AI infrastructure often rely on imports from foreign
providers. In Southeast Asia, the United States’ (US) dominance in AI infrastructure is
increasingly challenged by China’s Digital Silk Road, which finances and exports Chinese AI
systems abroad.
These rival infrastructures are not value-neutral, as each is built on a set of value-laden
technical standards that determine how AI systems function. These technical standards embody
a set of norms, which can be understood as a set of shared values and expectations about how
technology should be developed. Therefore, dependence on either foreign AI infrastructure
risks a category of digital colonialism, wherein foreign powers shape the recipient countries’
AI development according to their own vision. This raises a critical question: how can smaller
states negotiate the norms embedded within foreign AI infrastructures?
Using Malaysia as a case, I explore how a smaller state advances its AI infrastructure
development whilst minimising its dependence on any power. Drawing on qualitative
interviews and document analysis, I introduce the concept of Norm-Technical Agency (NTA).
NTA makes a novel contribution by showing that technical standards act as material carriers
of norms, linking International Relations insights on how states localise norms with Science
and Technology Studies perspectives that technical standards are socially and politically
constructed.
NTA challenges deterministic accounts of digital colonialism by showing that smaller
states can assert agency over norms by negotiating technical standards, not just discursively
through diplomatic or institutional discourse. By negotiating which technical standards are
adopted, states can exercise agency, understood as the capacity to act intentionally and
sufficiently freely to influence the norms embedded in imported AI infrastructure.

